This code is associated with the publication:

## Paleotoxicological Evaluation of Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds in Sediment Cores as Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals

Philippe J. Thomas David Eickmeyer, Kristin M. Eccles, Linda Kimpe, Bram Brouwer, Robert Letcher, Bruce Maclean, Laurie Chan, Jules Blais

Despite the economic benefits of the oil and gas industry in Northern Alberta, there remain significant concerns regarding the impacts of increased oil production on the environment and human health. Concerns regarding the impacts of contaminants arising from oil sands activity on surrounding wildlife and ecosystem health are consistently being raised. Several studies have highlighted increases in the concentrations of polycyclic aromatic compounds (PACs) in the atmosphere, water, soil and sediments, plants, wildlife and fish in the Athabasca Oil Sands Region (AOSR) as a result of proximity to oil sands industrial activity. PACs are of considerable concern for human and wildlife health due to their significant toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, and endocrine disrupting properties. Aquatic sediment cores can provide information on the temporal trends of contaminant input to the environment. Sediment cores are especially important when baseline monitoring data is missing. There has been little work to understand the biological impact of contaminants in these cores as a surrogate for the toxicity to freshwater systems. Using a paleotoxicological approach, our study combines analytical chemistry and a mammalian cell-based bioassay in dated lake sediment cores to assess paleotoxicity in freshwater systems affected by PACs emitted in the oil and gas sector and/or through natural forest fire and biomass combustion. Four sediment cores were collected from natural water bodies in the AOSR. Sediment intervals were radiometrically dated and subsequently analysed for PACs. PAC extracts from select dated intervals were used in cell-based bioassays to evaluate their endocrine disrupting properties. We demonstrated that there are spatial and temporal variability in the PAC composition of sediment cores around the AOSR with some of the highest levels of PACs and biological activity being detected near oil sands industrial activity. Our study is the first to link chemical analysis of sediment cores with endocrine function showing feasibility of extending the usefulness of sediment cores in monitoring programs. While we observed no spatial or temporal differences in ERα mediated signaling, this approach demonstrates the powerful potential of coupling biological effects assessments to historical reconstructions of contaminant inputs to the natural environment.